DANCERGIRL CONTENT


Under STORIES

Under Sub-section: Choreographer’s Corner 

Choreographer’s Corner: Arnella Bailey Britton's ‘Cubicle Tether’

Are We All Just Tethered To A Cubicle? 

By: Shanice Neita 

Arnella Bailey Britton had an ingenious idea for her final year show in a body therapist class. One afternoon at the School of Dance, EMCVPA, her lecturer gave the class an assignment to come up with movements based on things done throughout the entire day, so as she came up with movements, she noticed how simple they were, “all of my movements were locomotives,” she explained. “ Very simple, like walking, lifting an object, or standing. If it wasn't for this assignment, I wouldn’t have realized that I am living in a set routine every day. I wondered if it's only happening to me, do other people realize that we're doing the same thing over and over and over?” She continued. Taking it a step further, she began to identify where else these simplistic routines took place, and it dawned on her that in the office space, people move around in this same robotic sense; sitting, standing, walking, almost under a spell, just doing what they’re told until the clock strikes 5. “I started investigating the relationships there. I wanted to focus on the different dynamics in the workplace; that's how I came up with the themes, identifying the routines and the different conflicts that may arise.” She told DG. The overarching theme for her research was the influences of art and the impact it has on employees. How little in control they are of their own lives. 
I went to watch Arnella prepare for her final showcase. As I stepped into the Bert Rose Studio Theatre to meet her and observe her process, I noticed it was buzzing with energy — loud chatter reverberating off concrete walls, and dancers spilled into the rehearsal space because the School of Dance still lacks a proper lounge. Friends and family linger at the edges, waiting. Centre stage, Arnella is working through the solo with Melissa Thompson. Abby Pitter, Sontee Davis, and Joanna Millwood, the other members of the cast, sit, laugh, and mark the movements with their arms as they watch the rehearsal video, working through the choreography for the whole show. Oneil Pryce — Dance Lecturer at School of Dance and advisor to Arnella’s final year research project, sits in the first row of the first seat in the house, watching, carefully observing the piece as it unfolds, in between moves and directions made under Arnella’s choreography, he stops her and questions her decisions, “during the duet—what were we intended to see or feel?” She explains to him the emotional characteristics of each dancer and the theme that is to be displayed in each part. However, he continued by making mention that the work has been done, the choreography is complete, and the process has taken on a new form; it is now up to the dancers to deliver the message Arnella has so carefully investigated, planned, and orchestrated with her research. To effectively deliver the message, the dancers must now encapsulate the vision with their bodies and tell Arnella’s story. 
Mr. Pryce acts as both mentor and mirror, pushing the dancers to communicate the choreographer’s message.  “I know you guys are performers. Maybe next Thursday you’ll tear it up. But then that’s too late, because you won’t have gotten to the best place in time. You know the choreography well, but you also have to rehearse the character. And if you’re unsure, Arnella—as the creator—you have to stop them and clarify, because ultimately it’s a narrative.” The dancers listen with keen interest to Oneil Pryce’s advice right before continuing their rehearsal. Arnella signals the student lighting technician that she’s shifting gears and moving into blocking with the lighting cues—final year shows are fully student-operated, allowing students to become fully aware of the production process; lighting, sound, and stage management.  Arnella grabs her notebook, where she’s been scribbling notes for the show, and walks to the back of the theatre. The house lights go down, and the soloist enters stage left where the first cue is marked. A dark, unsettling set of strings is heard from the speaker in the wings on stage right as Melissa begins. Later, the other dancers join in as a sample of Michael Jackson’s Thriller instrumental begins to play, fittingly eerie, as they move through the confines of their personal cubicles, their private hells, their own purgatories. 
Between blocking and directing, I steal moments of Arnella’s focus to inquire about the work. “What do you hope the audience will take with them after seeing the show?” I question. Arnella urges the audience to look inward and recognize the unseen forces shaping their emotions: “There are people in your life that want to control you,” and often, the pain we carry is rooted in that control. She speaks from personal struggle, expressing a deep yearning for freedom: “I don’t want to be anybody’s puppet…I want to be able to live my life and be free,” revealing how the issue can take shape in any area of life: family, school, work. It’s not just external; it “impacts you mentally,” and when that happens, “everything is going down the drain.” We’re not meant to be tethered to a cubicle occupied in the mundane of simple office tasks, email this, print that, copy those. We are all artists by nature, and the need for expression is rife within us, so if you feel sad, despondent, or frustrated, it's time to find your outlet, as you may be tethered to your very own cubicle. 






























Under FEATURES: 


If Faith is the Evidence of Things not Seen, where did Emiah’s Dreams go? 

By: Shanice Neita

“The truth is, I didn’t like dance. I was forced to dance because at the Sierra Lambert School of Dance, where I was enrolled in gymnastics, all of us had to take dance classes as well,” Emiah revealed on our Zoom call. Her in Trinidad and I, here in Jamaica. That revelation shocked me after watching Emiah blossom during those short few months of her being at Edna Manley, School of Dance in her first year, and I in my second. I remember choreographing on her for my Introduction to Movement & Choreography class, and how much I enjoyed watching her embody the vision I had in mind for the piece. She was enthusiastic, a fast learner, and very motivated to be excellent at everything she did. Emiah Fleming is a dancer through and through, but before dance, she was ready to become the next Thema Williams. At the age of six, her mom enrolled her in gymnastics for the next three years. She dedicated her time to backward rolls and mastering her handstands while she begrudingly had to tendu and plié. At the age of nine, she had her very first gymnastics competition, before she could even show off her moves, she suffered a slipped disk—a serious spinal injury. She lost her passion, but dance gave her the chance at a new dream. Ironically, dance was gentler, more forgiving, and more physically manageable despite her condition. “Dance was the one thing that accepted me; it was the one thing I could do. Most importantly, it was God. He allowed me the opportunity to dance despite having a slipped disk; He gave me the provision to be able to still do what I can do physically, even when the doctor said no,” she told DancerGirl. Emiah’s newfound love granted her freedom in movement without pain, though she was intimately acquainted with chiropractors and acupuncturists for the next seven years. This gave way to new pain in her early teens, trauma she didn't have words to express, but again, dance showed up for her. “It became the platform where I could speak loudly without offending anybody, where I could tell my entire life story in a moment but yet it is still hidden. So that is the catalyst of my passion and drive for dance.” 

She started with the basics: jazz, ballet, and modern dance. Ballet was the least favored, as her white English dance teacher was “totally strict”. Emiah soon realized that that was merely the foundation, setting her up for a life that required discipline, perseverance, and leaps and jumps. When Emiah was 14 years old, she competed in the Talent Fest Competition in Trinidad for the first time as a soloist under her choreography to the sounds of A New Day Has Come by Celine Dion. The competition resulted in her placing 13 out of 15 dancers. However, that didn’t deter a scout in the audience who saw Emiah’s potential and asked her to represent Trinidad & Tobago in the World Championship of Performing Arts in Hollywood, California. And on that stage, Emiah Fleming made her mark; she placed second out of 57 countries and won three dance scholarships. “That experience screamed to me, you are actually good at this!” 
Taking classes in Trinidad, young Emiah felt discrimination got in the way of her dance pursuits as she was the only one of her skin color in her dance classes, and as a young girl, very few teachers affirmed her throughout her dance journey. Receiving second place among 57 other nations proved different for her. “I did not feel as if I was good enough. Nobody actually said you are a great dancer, of course, my two teachers, Sierra Lambert and Pauline Paul, believed in me; however, it was never truly verbalised.” 

She returned home to Trinidad from the competition with a plan. “As soon as I got home, I said, Mommy, Daddy, I want to pursue dance as a degree.” The wheels were set in motion. Emiah took courses throughout high school that aligned her path for dance and applied relentlessly to the best programs in the United States and the United Kingdom. Goucher College in Baltimore, Maryland, said yes. She was ecstatic and started her preparations for college. "I said to myself, yes, I’m going! I got the chance to attend one of my dream schools. I got accepted! I visited the school with my family, made plans, and secured funding, but I was denied my student visa. So that was my first point of denial.” She shifted in her chair, looked at her watch, and breathed out before continuing. “After I wrote CAPE and graduated, I took a step back from dance and started working, and one day I looked around and thought, is this all to life? Did I have this big desire for what?” 

 She decided then and there she would try again and apply to study for a double major in dance & physiotherapy at the University of the West Indies (UWI). “I also loved physiotherapy, and being injured, I realized that doctors never could bring me back to full performance, because they didn't understand the anatomy of a dancer. I wanted to be someone who could help dancers take care of their instrument—their body.” Unbeknownst to her, the program was affiliated with the Edna Manley College of the Visual & Performing Arts, where she would take her dance courses. “I hope the Trinis don’t come for me for this, but the pursuit of dance in Jamaica is so different from Trinidad. Edna Manley felt like a breath of life to a dead tree.” It may not have been love at first tendu, but Emiah bloomed at the School of Dance, being surrounded by so many young, ambitious dancers ready to take on the world and make a difference with their art; she was inspired. The first semester went off without a hitch, and she dedicated most of her studies to her foundational courses at UWI just to get them out of the way so she could focus more on dance in her second semester. She was working on her choreographic piece for the annual showcase, DanceWorks at the School of Dance, and even made it on the cover art for the show. During Christmas break, she went home to her friends and family, excited for the new semester in January. 

 “My parent stocked me up with stuff for school, I had the payment for my apartment, and I was just ready to go back to Jamaica.” Unfortunately, two weeks into the new semester, the Trinidad & Tobago government pulled her funding, given her double major, the scholarship wasn’t sufficient to cover both. “It was heartwrenching for me, and the truth is my parents could not have afforded to pay for me to continue. My mom took early retirement just to send me off to school. That's a whole other story within itself. But I felt as if it wasn't just the government, but I felt as if everyone had failed me. At 15 years old, it was so clear that I wanted to study dance; why wouldn't they make preparations for me to pursue this dream? I’m getting emotional, but I had to say goodbye to a place that believed in me. Being introduced to so many dynamic teachers and students, and I took pride in being the only Trini there at that time,” she laughed between the cracks in her voice. Tears filled her eyes as she recalled a memory still difficult to share. “As much as it broke me, I believe it was divine intervention. Because the truth is, I didn’t have the faith to stay. After so much disappointment, I felt as if God had abandoned me. I felt ike the 13-year-old who was just good at something, but not good enough. I felt like life was saying, this far and no further.”  

Emiah flew home to Trinidad and completely gave up on the dream she had for dance. But dance didn’t give up on her; it was always there in the background, just waiting for her to return. She maintained a relationship with Shift Contemporary Dance Company in Trinidad, participating in shows and events, and even auditioned for the Joffrey Ballet School in New York, but on the morning of her audition, someone very dear to her passed away. She showed up, but mentally and emotionally, she was shattered, and for her, it felt like dance was breaking her. For an entire year, she stopped dancing completely. 

In 2018, the Cocoa Dance Festival in Trinidad partnered with different universities and dance companies, and the Joffrey Ballet School was offering summer intensive auditions, so she decided to try again. “My mom said to me, If you are broken in this place, and you leave without healing, you will bleed wherever you go. When a glass breaks in a room, you don’t go into the streets to find the pieces—you go back to the place it broke. That stuck with me. Dance was the place where I broke down, so I had to go back there to gather my pieces. I didn’t attend the audition to get the scholarship. I went to face my brokenness.” 
In her pursuit to reclaim her place in dance, she found courage, and with that courage, she received the scholarship for the summer intensive. However, it was only 50% of the funding for the program. She had to find a way to come up with the rest to head to New York the following summer. “I decided I was going to do a dance production to raise funds. I wasn’t part of a company. I didn’t own a studio. Social media wasn’t what it is now. Still, I decided to tell my story through a production called Series of Grey. It reflected everything I had been through—from discovering dance, to my visa denial, Edna Manley, to losing someone close to me—and that it was now time to take flight.”
The show was held on May 31, 2019, and it was a sold-out performance with a 500-person capacity and a demand for an encore. Emiah raised more than enough to cover the program fees, flights, and boarding. With a little bit of faith and a whole lot of perseverance, she met her goal and more. 
“This was my way of telling my winter story. Because God knows when we’ve had enough sun. In my winter season, I saw myself in a forest where the trees were bare. But God told me in the winter, you can see farther ahead. In summer, the full leaves block your vision. Winter is for clarity. And when spring comes, you’ll know where you’re going. Series of Grey helped me honor that season, and I hope it inspired others to do the same. I raised more than I needed, and that summer, I attended the Joffrey Ballet School. That’s where my heartbeat came back.
That’s where I remembered why I dance.”

DG:  Talk to me about your preparation for the Series of Grey dance production. This was your first-ever dance production. Did you do all the choreography, lighting, music, and theatre management? 				

Emiah: I would have been predominantly in charge of the creative direction. My brother is an excellent lighting designer, and he is the one person who pushes me a lot. He'll be on me to strive for excellence; he challenged me so much in my creative process. I choreographed most of the pieces, except for two. I came up with the stage design, but I solicited a team of persons to help me with sound engineering, and my best friend's brother is a producer, and he did a track for me that spoke about the moments where I died in dance and where I came alive again. Costuming, I was able to solicit help from Honey Brooks, a designer here in Trinidad. She was able to guide that whole process, and I had persons to do music direction because I had a piece with a live band. It was a beautiful thing to create because the people around me believed in the story, and they believed in the moment, and I had a thousand percent of their support. 
What was it like for you to be dancing in an international space, learning from the likes of Terk Lewis and other world-renowned dancers & choreographers? How did that impact you as a dancer? 
					
 Listen, it was crazy! Again, I was the minority because there were only two people who looked like me in the entire program, but it was breathtaking. It took me to a new dimension of the craft of dance. I felt like Edna Manley moved me up, but then I felt as if Joffery took it to another level that was beyond my thoughts. I met one of my favorite dancers from So You Think You Can Dance, Amy Yakima, like Amy was teaching my class! I was starstruck. I wasn’t the strongest dancer in terms of technique among the other students there. However, it allowed me to live in the moment. Even though some classes were a bit challenging for me, I embraced those moments. I was not the only international student in my class. I met a couple of people from Colombia, Puerto Rico, and we became good friends even up to today. We are still supporting one another in our dance ventures, and that was the highlight for me. Being selected to perform at the Spectrum Theatre off-Broadway was another amazing opportunity. Just being in the program itself was life-changing for me, and it allowed me to dream again. There was one day, I went to Times Square and I saw the sign for The Lion King and I took a video of myself and said, “This is one thing I'm going to believe. At some point in my lifetime, I'm going to dance in The Lion King”. I had auditioned a couple of times, unsuccessful on both occasions. However, that experience at Joffrey just showed me that all the dreams you have, you just have to take them. Just take it and own it, and it added a lot of value that when I came back home, it caused me to approach my craft differently.
					

Your contemporary dance master classes. What gave you the idea to start doing those? 

In COVID, I started a dance company entitled SEED, which would have been a space for Christian-trained dancers like myself, but many times the church rejected dance. Because of that, persons who are skilled and trained like me don't always get the opportunity to express that level of technique within the Christian forum. I co-founded this company with Chinead Simmons to provide platforms for other trained dancers to use their training in Christian settings. And also to help the gospel industry here in Trinidad, level up on the excellence of the representation of dance. During COVID, that would have been a special project I was a part of. Challenges came up in between; we received many opportunities, but a lot of them came with a lot of rejection. I started these masterclasses as a means of stepping out of the box and stepping into my full potential, and creating my own space to do so. In addition to that, to create a space for contemporary dancers to have a better approach to their skill and the creative process of contemporary dance.
 In November of last year, I launched my masterclasses. And then here in 2025, I am excited to do two more masterclasses in the latter part of this year. The classes opened opportunities where institutions solicited me to work with them privately. I want to create a space for contemporary dancers to believe in themselves, to stretch beyond what they think they are capable of, and to highlight a level of excellence in their approach. Many times, I think that in a career as dancers, we do not take advantage of the monetary aspects of our craft. I want to launch very soon, something called E.V.F., a series, where I don't just post dance classes, but also have conversations surrounding dance.	To advise young dancers who want to study dance and how to approach applying to international spaces, through SEED, I would have learned marketing & branding, so with this series, I could talk about how to brand yourself as a dancer as well. 		
					
 You've mentioned something I thought was interesting. You said that churches don't support dance. Is that still happening today in Trinidad & Tobago? 
					
Not as far as 10 years ago, but some churches weren’t open to receiving dance to be what we know it, but now, through SEED, we were able to bring some awareness to it. I spend a lot of my time now going to churches to help them develop a dance ministry, help them understand the importance of the craft itself, putting time and energy into advancing technique while simultaneously discovering what God says about dance and then marrying the two—teaching skill and spirit because many times people say, “yes I love Jesus and I'm anointed to dance,” and their vocabulary is limited. It's kind of like if you give me some scores to play on a piano, if I don't develop my skill and my understanding of the piano, I will not be able to translate what you are giving me to play. It's an excellent score for me to play; however, I am limited in my skill, so I cannot express it. Dance is the same. I've been working with a lot of churches, letting them know that your body is equipped to translate the scriptures into worship. More and more traditional churches have become open to it, to the acceptance of dance. So many of these churches are now having dance productions each year, and I was a part of making that a reality.	


Renee’s Choreographic Pursuit of 
Drama & Beauty 
By: Shanice Neita

Renee picks up my call, walking to the park across the street from the library at Queen Mary University of London, where she’s been studying for her LLM in Technology, Media & Telecommunications. She tells me she’s been eager to learn more about cybercrime from the inside out, as she’ll one day help shape the laws surrounding it. We get a glimpse into the serious mind of the attorney-at-law. It starkly contrasts her easy-going personality and the fierce choreographer we’ve come to know and love. 
Renee McDonald is a full-time lawyer, a career she embarked on in 2013. But before Renee’s world of litigations and lawsuits took center stage, she performed in a different kind of theatre. It all started in the audience. At a tender age, Renee beamed with pride watching her best friend, Shari, perform with the Tony Wilson School of Dance. Enthralled with the performances, she asked her mom if she could take classes with her. Soon, Shari and Renee were dancing alongside each other under the tutelage of Mr. Wilson himself. Her natural desire for leadership and raw creative instinct kicked in, she and Shari would dance for hours on end to the sounds of Backstreet Boys, Spice Girls, and Britney Spears, taking the process of dance-making she learned from Tony Wilson and applying it to her school and church groups: Campion Dance Soceity, cheerleading team and dance ministry, completely unaware of her choreographic skills taking shape. 
Everything shifted in 2008, after Dr. L’Antoinette Stines witnessed her choreographic performance at a fundraiser held by close friend Jordan Lee Wyatt. Dr. Stines approached her with words that would stay with her forever. Renee recalls, 
“She came over to me and said, choreography is a gift from God that some people are just born with, and you are born with it. That was the moment a light went on. I realized this was bigger than just fun and cheers.” Now, when Renee watches her students across Jamaica choreographing with boldness and imagination, she recognizes the same spark she had as a young girl. “I used to downplay those early years,” she says thoughtfully. “But really, my choreographic journey started as a child.”
Renee continued to nurture her passion as a choreographer. When she got to the University of the West Indies, she quickly got involved with the University Dance Society (UDS) and became their resident choreographer. Upon seeing Renee’s work blossom, Dr. Stines invited Renee to choreograph a piece on L’Acadco- A United Caribbean Dance Force, her first-ever choreographic debut on a professional dance company. She catapulted from there and, in 2012, decided she was going to be a full-time dance professional. For her, the reality of sustaining a dance career in Jamaica quickly proved difficult. 
 "It really depends on what you want," she explains. Dancers could take on commercial work; however, if not consistently shooting advertisements, performing stage left, and in every video shoot, they would struggle to build a stable life for themselves. Renee, on the other hand, consistently sought choreographic work; however, choreographing full-time is only viable if you own your own company and school. With a limited number of productions staged each year, opportunities to present work consistently are rare. 
The most sustainable path, in her view, is a combination of teaching, choreographing, and dancing. Without that mix, major life milestones like owning your own home, health insurance, and renewing your car every few years can seem out of reach.
She recalls realizing this while piecing together gigs, from hosting 'dancersize' classes for insurance companies — a stark contrast to her artistic pursuits — to finding joy teaching children in summer camps. Yet, even with these efforts, the life she dreamed of for herself stayed stubbornly out of reach.
"I said to myself, I need to be a lawyer," she says, releasing a long breath, the weight of that decision still palpable. “I was happy!” She paused and looked off into the distance. “I truly admire people who commit to a dance career in Jamaica because it is not easy, and most likely the ones that are doing well are probably doing a second job they may not be happy doing,” she finished. 
We mused over the lives of first-world dancers being able to wake up at 9 a.m., head to class by 10, break for lunch, then dive into more classes and rehearsals. Evenings would end with dinner at a sleek restaurant, laughter with friends, and finally, home to ice their aching limbs and rest, ready to do it all again the next day, unbothered by the weight of survival. A far cry from what we face in the Caribbean when pursuing art in the creative industry. 
In 2017, for a few fleeting weeks, Renee was granted the opportunity of being a full-time choreographer in New York City for Ailey II, where she relished the dream she had longed for in 2012. We basked in her memory of the ease she felt while finally experiencing the life of a choreographer and the joy of being in the city of dreams. 


DG: You started choreographing from early on, taking what you knew from Tony Wilson’s School of Modern Dance. How do you think Tony Wilson impacted your journey as a choreographer? 

Renee: Because I’ve trained with him my whole life, it's like his work is in my blood. His style has become so influential on my style; he was and still is such a big inspiration for every single piece of work I’ve created. You can see Mr. Wilson in all of them. People can identify my piece without having seen a program. I started choreographing for the University Dance Society (UDS) at the University of the West Indies (UWI), and that's where my journey into professional choreography truly started. I did their lunch hour concert, then their season of dance. After my first season with them, Dr. Stines was the first Artistic Director to allow me to choreograph for a dance company, and shortly after, Mr. Wilson saw my work at another UDS showcase and asked me to remount a piece on Company Dance Theatre (CDT), and at that point, I became a resident choreographer. I have choreographed a piece every year since 2012. Sir was very instrumental in my career by giving me every solitary opportunity to choreograph a piece each year, even though Dr. Stines was the first to allow me the privilege of choreographing on the company level.

It’s been a while since we’ve seen you perform. I believe the last time was during the opening of CDT’s 2024 Season of Dance — Rejoice in the Clouds — where you returned to the stage for one night only to honor Tony Wilson. What was it like stepping back into the spotlight to pay tribute to your first teacher?
I flew in from London last November to pay tribute to Sir because he was my mentor, and it was his memorial, and that was important to me—to perform every night and give him a tribute that was in all of the ways that he influenced me through dance and choreography. But I do not plan to be on the stage anytime soon or at all. I love to dance, but I just can't be on the stage because it is too mentally stressful for me. I struggle with my body image, my weight, and the fact that I am not flexible. I’m dramatic; I will give you expression, I will give you back, you will get all of that, but I struggle a lot. So dance just became emotionally exhausting and mentally unhealthy, so I stopped in 2016 at the Jamaica Dance Umbrella (JDU) show, which was my last real performance. I have come out of retirement for special events and have done a few cameos, but I don't plan on doing it anymore. 

I don’t think I’ve ever seen you perform. I missed out on the chance of watching you embody the works of Tony Wilson, but I have seen you choreograph. What inspires you when you create a new piece? What does it look like? What does it feel like? Walk me through your process? 

I have two processes. Process ‘A’ takes me through a feeling of needing to say something, a burning sensation in my chest that is just yearning to get out. I would write it down and then hunt down music that communicates the concept to my liking, then I would put the pieces of the puzzle together to create a work for the dancers.

 Process ‘B’; I would hear music, and just see dancers emerging before me. I would get so inspired by it and listen to it over and over again, and visualize a piece until a concept comes to me, then I put all the pieces together, which is the process I prefer. I have a book at home where I write all of my pieces. Some of the very first choreography I ever did, you’d find sketches of costumes, formations, and all those small details for each piece. I usually write things down. Major moments in my life, lifts I want to try; however, I would cement those before going to the studio, but minimum 75% of my pieces are made up on the spot in the studio. 

Your choreography is deeply rooted in music, often characterized by high-tempo, operatic, and staccato rhythms. You frequently use canons, intense expressions, and the lighting and costumes add to the drama that truly elevates the work. What initially drew you to this highly musical and theatrical style, and how do you see it shaping your choreographic voice today?
The Company Dance Theatre is called a dance theatre for a reason. In Mr. Wilson’s early days, a lot of his work told stories, and he was just all about drama and beauty. I did, however, evolve from doing pieces like “You make me wanna shout!” as I got older. I was dancing more and more to the cinematic, high-tempo movements. Many of his works were dynamic, using canons, entrances & exits, the groupings and formations, and a lot of the things that are characteristics of my work are just through osmosis—just having been immersed in his work and then making it my own, it's what now comes naturally to me as I am choreographing. 
Where do you hope to take your choreography? You’ve choreographed for many local and international companies, from NDTC, L’Acadco, CDT, Ailey II, and The Emma Willard School in New York. Where do you plan to go next? 

Continue to choreograph, especially in international spaces. I am so familiar with the dancers in Jamaica. I know when I go into Dance Theatre Xaymaca (DTX), from when I’m in CDT to when I’m in the National Dance Theatre Company (NDTC) studio. I know everyone in the room, their strengths, weaknesses, attitudes, everything. When I go into an international studio and I don't know anyone, it's such a refreshing feeling. There are a few things that are amazing when working with international dancers, including getting to know the dancers that I’m working with while in the choreographic process. It's exciting, being in a new location as I love to travel, and being able to feel like a full-time dance practitioner. Because in Jamaica, I’m a full-time attorney, and I kinda have to squeeze in dance. 

Traveling for the sole purpose of dance becomes my life. I get to wake up, have breakfast and coffee, and then jet off to rehearsals, which is a great feeling; it's less pressure when I choreograph internationally. The audience in Jamaica is so familiar with my work, so much so that I feel I can't give them anything anymore that will make them clutch their pearls or sit on the edge of their seats. It feels as though they expect me to top myself every time, and that in itself is stressful. I have lost sleep, thunk myself into a panic and have been up until 2 am with my friend Orville on the phone, worried, because I was putting on a new piece for the Jamaican audience, who can say “yeah well it wasnt Divulgence” or “yeah but it wasn’t Spectrum” and that gives me anxiety, whether they’re doing it or not. But when I’m in a new space where they’re unfamiliar with me, I am offering something new and refreshing in their eyes, which puts me at ease. 

DG: I agree, the local audience thrives on the new and shiny things within this pool of talent we’ve created for ourselves. Topping yourself has become the norm. We expect greatness from our local artists because it's all we’ve come to know. Vybz Kartel drops music every single week. Check his YouTube page, even incarcerated, he understood the need to stay relevant within this country, while in other countries, he remains relevant from his early 2000s records. I’m sure half the world is still unfamiliar with his work, which has been out for the past 10 years. Leaving Jamaica to work in your area of expertise to recharge and replenish your creative muscles is necessary as an artist, and taking in some of that outside validation for the work you’ve created, you are far more appreciated for it for longer than our local audience that constantly seeks us to one-up ourselves. I would implore our local audience to give us a bit more grace and understanding that talent is never leaving, but inspiration dims now and again. 

You've been incredibly active as a choreographer, but it sounds like you're entering a new season. Would you say you're taking a step back from choreography? Do you have plans to focus more on other passions?
I need to take a break from choreography right now. I want to focus on pieces that I feel inspired to get off my heart, so if that means it's just one piece in 5 years, that's where I want to go. Because I would be going from doing 7-8 pieces a year, which is a lot, especially when an audience wants to be blown away by the eighth piece. I want to get back to a place where I’m just bursting with one truly inspirational piece and just do that. Simplify my schedule and simplify my life. Because usually, my schedule looks like; 

Monday 
Be a Lawyer from 9 am-5 pm
Teach an adult dance class 
CDT class 
CDT rehearsal 

Tuesday
Be a Lawyer from 9 am-5 pm
DTX class 
DTX rehearsal 

Wednesday
Be a Lawyer from 9 am-5 pm
Teach a children's dance class
NDTC class 
NDTC rehearsal

Thursday 
Be a Lawyer from 9 am-5 pm
CDT class again 
CDT rehearsal again 

Friday 
Be a Lawyer from 9 am-5 pm
Stella Maris class
Stella Maris rehearsal

Saturday 
Possible additional rehearsals (depending on the time of year)
Campion Dance Society class 
Campion Dance Society rehearsal

Sunday 
Plié for the Arts class
Plié for the Arts rehearsal  

It's not a life that is sustainable to me anymore; it's exhausting, so I’m trying to find a way when I return home to Jamaica to make significant changes to how I approach choreography, teaching, and leadership in the dance space. I have already started mentoring, I offer advice, I will go into rehearsals, and watch young choreographers and advise them. Mentorship is something I am passionate about, and is a current and future part of my path in dance. I have a lot of plans surrounding it to bring in international choreographers and host workshops to help bring about a new generation of choreographers in Jamaica. 










When you click the video banner (respective dancer name), it takes you to the dancer of the month page 
Dancer of The Month;
Joelle Flimn

Joelle is a young, passionate artist born and raised in Kingston, Jamaica, devoted to the dance, singing, and acting fields, with many years of dance experience in classical, modern, contemporary, folk, and jazz styles. Having been immersed in dance for nearly 20 years, Joelle began her dance journey with the classical dance form of ballet at Vickers Dance Studio, garnering more than 10 distinctions and special awards in the Royal Academy of Dance (RAD) Curriculum. 

Joelle has indulged in a myriad of distinct dance forms before and succeeded in joining the National Dance Theatre Company of Jamaica (NDTC), which was once home to an internationally renowned dancer and choreographer, Clive Thompson, as well as performed works by Hope Boykin, Troy Powell, and Garfield Lemonius with the company. Joelle is also a member of Jamaica’s elite Plié for the Arts Global Collective, whose shows have
welcomed acclaimed artists such as Misty Copeland of The American Ballet Theatre, Desmond Richardson and Clifford Williams of Complexions Contemporary Ballet, and Michael Jackson Jr. of Alvin Ailey, to name a few.

Through Plié for the Arts, she has performed famed works such as “Bolero” by Shahar Binyamini has attended master classes with individuals such as Alicia Graf Mack, Matthew Rushing, Celise Hicks, and Robert Battle, where she will perform the former’s work in August 2025, alongside “Cry Me A River”, choreographed by Andrew Winghart. She is in her 7th season with the NDTC, her 6th season with the Plié for the Arts Global Collective, and is pursuing a distinction and an associate degree in RAD’s Advanced 2 Examination.


And now, DancerGirl proudly introduces our very first Dancer of the Month: the fierce, vibrant, and eloquent Joelle Flimn. From her early training at Vickers Dance Studio, where she built a strong classical foundation, to her powerful performances in works by Rex Nettleford, Hope Boykin for the NDTC, Joelle has blossomed into an artist of remarkable depth. Her dedication and discipline are evident in every step, whether gracing the stage for Plie for the Arts Collective, embodying raw emotion in Kai Wiggan’s To Be Loved, or representing the National Dance Theatre Company for seven seasons both locally and internationally. Joelle’s artistry is not only technically brilliant but also profoundly inspiring — a true reflection of passion in motion.
DancerGirl is proud to name Joelle Flimn as our first Dancer of the Month.
 Trained at Vickers Dance Studio with a strong foundation in ballet, Joelle has since carved out a dynamic career spanning classical and contemporary performance. Her versatility is evident in works by Rex Nettleford and Hope Boykin for the National Dance Theatre Company, as well as with Plie for the Arts Collective. She has also brought her artistry to the screen in Kai Wiggan’s To Be Loved and has represented the NDTC across seven seasons, both locally and internationally.
What defines Joelle is not only her technical command but her ability to translate discipline into artistry. Fierce yet eloquent, she continues to emerge as one of the most compelling voices in Caribbean dance.




Under Stories:
Under sub-section: Money Moves 


Money Moves: 8 Basic Tips for Dancers on Budgeting, Branding, & Getting Gigs
with: Daneele Dixon

By: Shanice Neita
Growing up as a ballet dancer, Daneele Dixon began her journey at Vickers Dance Studio before expanding her repertoire to include tap, modern, contemporary, ballroom, hip-hop, and dancehall. In her early years, she danced with the Dance Theatre Xaymaca and the University Dance Society, exploring the styles she most enjoyed performing.
When the COVID-19 pandemic hit in 2020, Daneele took a bold step—sliding into the DMs of Jamaican corporate companies and the dance sector’s top performers with her talent portfolio and a dream. She pitched partnerships, offering her skills as leverage, until Shamara “Inspire” Spence gave her her first professional gig. That opportunity led to a music video role and opened the door to Jamaica’s commercial dance scene, placing her in the spotlight and leading to even more high-profile projects.
When the music hits and her body moves, there’s no mistaking the presence of Daneele Dixon. But behind the bold lines and captivating rhythms is a young Caribbean creative who understands that talent alone isn’t enough. In today’s industry, branding is as critical as choreography, and dancers are expected to be entrepreneurs, influencers, and visual storytellers all at once to land gigs and earn respect.
“Companies don’t want average. They want fresh, new, different,” (pull out quote)
The Art of Standing Out
In the age of TikTok trends and Instagram reels, personal branding has become a dancer’s secret weapon. It isn’t just about looking good on stage; it’s about communicating who you are and what you bring to a client, a company, or a campaign. 
“Why are you a dancer? Why should companies use you to make their brand bigger? Having your own brand can get you a far way because companies don't want the everyday thing, they want something different, fresh, new. So that's why you have to keep posting that content, and you have to keep putting yourself out there to create your brand,” she says. 
Don’t Dance Alone
Social media can feel overwhelming. Her solution? Collaborate. “Honestly, the only reason I think I'm not overwhelmed is because I don't do it alone,” she shares. By teaming up with other creatives who share similar goals, the pressure spreads out. One person finds the location, another gets the videographer, and suddenly, content creation becomes a communal effort instead of a chore.
From Concept to Contract
Branding isn’t just about likes and followers; it’s about creating opportunities. She recounts a moment when she used a branded product as a prop in a dance video, purely out of creative instinct.
“First, your profile should always be public so anyone can see you when they come across your page. The more consistently you post, the better it is for you. And the more you create content without waiting for someone to tell you what to do, the more attractive you become to potential clients.
For example, if I’m filming a dance video and decide to sip a certain brand’s drink at the start as if it’s energizing me, that’s just my own idea. A company might see that and think, Whoa—she’s creative, she’s theatrical, she’s not just a flat dancer. Always have an idea, have a concept, put it out there, and somebody who loves it is going to see it and is going to want to see you do that for them.”
The Dance Portfolio 101
Whether you’re fresh out of dance school or pivoting mid-career, professional assets are essential. “Almost all of the bigger companies ask for a headshot,” she notes. But that's not the only thing you’ll need.
She advises dancers to create solo reels, choreography samples (if applicable), and resumes using free tools like Canva. “There was a point in time where I used to only have videos with my friends and I who dance, and I didn't have a solo reel, and that kind of weighed on me a bit because whenever they would ask for a solo, I don't have anything to give them and the gig would just pass me. So it is important to have your solo shots, your solo headshots, some choreography that you've done on your own because they're going to ask for it.”

The First Reach-Out
She started booking gigs during COVID by cold-messaging brands on Instagram. Her secret? A digital portfolio.
“I put together a portfolio with all my past events, dance achievements, the companies I’ve worked with, and every project I’ve been part of—basically, a talent résumé. Then I started reaching out to brands on Instagram. Trust me, some of them really do respond. I’d message them saying, Hey, I’m a content creator who specializes in dance. I’d love the opportunity to be part of your next project.
That’s one way to do it. Another is signing up with your local talent agencies. It’s an easy way to connect with the right people and land opportunities, whether it’s commercials, short videos, or opportunities on local TV.”

Red Flags and Real Talk
If a gig feels shady, it probably is.
“If they can't tell you who the artist is? What's the song? Do you want professional choreography? What's the outfit? Where am I getting my makeup? What's the transportation? How much is the payment? When do I get paid? Is it before or after? Do I get a 50% deposit? If they can't answer any of those questions, red flag. Huge. Because it most likely means that it's just going to be disorganized from then on out.”
She’s had experiences where gigs dragged on, added surprise scenes, or forgot to pay entirely while dodging emails and messages on Instagram. 
“No matter how much exposure you probably might get. It's not worth it. It's a red flag because they're using you at that point.”
“Exposure doesn’t pay bills.” (pull out quote) 
Contracts: Read the Fine Print
Every dancer needs to know their rights. A solid contract should include your compensation, the length of the commitment, and how either party can terminate the agreement.
“Take a picture of every page before and after you sign. Send it to someone you trust. Even if it’s just your friend and email everything! There are no WhatsApp messages for documents and contracts that you should be signing.” 

Defining Your Dance Identity
So, how do you find your niche? Explore.
"I started with ballet, but I tried everything. Tap, modern, hip-hop, dancehall. I think that because I had the time to explore all these different genres,  it gave me versatility. So, I stand out in any room regardless. When you have technique for each of these different dance styles and you master them, you're basically unstoppable. So, definitely try all the dance styles and see which one you love most.
In a region brimming with talent, her story is proof that building a dance career today takes more than just steps. It takes strategy, savvy, and a whole lot of self-definition.
And for dancers across the Caribbean and beyond, that journey begins with a single, intentional move.
(these can literally be on the side) 
Sidebar: Must-Have Dance Tools
Solo reel (1 min)


Professional headshot


Canva or Adobe Express portfolio


Open social profile with consistent content


Talent resume with training, credits, and style specialties


Red Flags to Watch For
No clear payment terms


Vague gig details


Last-minute changes without compensation


No defined role (lead, extra, choreographer)


Pro Tip: Always communicate over email, no text messages when negotiating gigs.




MISSION 
To inspire the minds of the creatively passionate by revealing the limitless possibilities within dance. Proudly rooted in Brand Jamaica and embracing the wider Caribbean, we celebrate and amplify the artistry, integrity, and evolution of dance across every island through vibrant storytelling, thoughtful critique, and engaging educational content. Our mission is to honor the region’s rich cultural diversity—its histories, traditions, and contemporary expressions—while positioning Caribbean dance as a global force for identity, innovation, and influence. We empower young creatives with the knowledge, inspiration, and resources they need to thrive both at home and on the world stage.
VISION 
DancerGirl Magazine seeks to build a thriving Caribbean creative ecosystem where dance is more than performance—it is a vital vehicle for cultural storytelling, regional pride, and economic empowerment. We envision a united Caribbean community of artists, audiences, and cultural advocates who elevate Caribbean dance as a powerful symbol of identity, innovation, and influence, driving the region’s cultural capital on the global stage.

ABOUT 
The Caribbean’s first magazine dedicated entirely to dance and its dancers.
At DancerGirl Magazine, our mission is to spotlight regional talent, strengthen audience engagement both across the Caribbean and internationally, and create new economic pathways for dancers, companies, schools, groups, and organizations through media exposure, advertising, and branded partnerships.
We serve an incredibly talented yet underserved community by offering compelling storytelling, a centralized regional event calendar, and vibrant short-form video and photo content. By bridging Caribbean dance communities and connecting them with international markets, we aim to boost revenue opportunities within the entertainment industry and shift dance from the non-profit sector to a thriving, for-profit model.
With a strong foundation, industry connections, and a bold, creative vision, DancerGirl Magazine is poised to become a cultural and commercial game-changer for Caribbean dance.
A Letter from the Editor 
Editor in Chief Shanice Neita on New Steps, Old Stories
It’s my world, and you’re all just living in it! ✨
Hello, dance friends, and welcome to DancerGirl Magazine. A dream that’s lived in my head for the past 11 years has finally made its debut on your screens — and, one day soon, your coffee tables.
Growing up, I was sure I’d work at a glossy magazine in New York City — my favorite city. After all, I was raised on Sex & The City, Gossip Girl, and The Devil Wears Prada. But instead of chasing someone else’s masthead, life brought me here — creating a magazine of my own, one dedicated to dance and to the Caribbean stories I hold closest.
The seed was planted while I was in the audience at a dance performance, dreaming about writing a review for the Observer or the Gleaner, so others might be inspired to see the show too. That thought grew into how-to scribbles, season of dance drafts, and vox pop ideas that never saw the light of day — but it sparked something in me I couldn’t let go of. And here we are, September 2025, with our first issue.
This premiere edition celebrates the theme New Steps, Old Stories. It’s a reminder that while Caribbean dance is always evolving, it is rooted in traditions and legacies that deserve to be shared. On the cover, Joelle Flimn takes her place as our first Dancer of the Month — a fierce artist I first encountered back at Vickers Dance Studio, and who has only grown more extraordinary with each stage she graces, from the dance film To Be Loved by Kai Wiggan to seven seasons of dance at the NDTC. And she’s just getting started.
We also spotlight Emiah Fleming, whose choreography has reshaped how dance is received in Trinidad’s Christian spaces, and catch up with Jamaican choreographer Renee McDonald, whose artistry has traveled from Kingston to Ailey II in New York. We spoke for hours about our passion for dance — it felt less like an interview and more like friends gushing over dreams. The joys this first issue has brought me are only a fraction of my desire for dance in the Caribbean space.
Putting together this first issue is only a glimpse of what I hope this magazine will bring: connection, recognition, and a wider audience for Caribbean dance. These may be new steps in our region’s dance landscape, but they are woven from old stories — stories of artistry, resilience, and vision for dance and its dancers that we’ve long shared amongst each other, but now we pull back the curtains to invite you into our world.
Welcome to DancerGirl Magazine. We’re only at the first step — and the dance is far from over.
Love,
DancerGirl


FOR PRINT 






Dancer: Speak Up! 

Neila Ebanks on Dance as a Voice for Culture and Transformation
In the Caribbean, where movement has always carried memory, history, and resistance, Neila-ann Ebanks,  a dancer, choreographer, educator, and advocate, has spent her career demonstrating that dance is not mere entertainment but an ecosystem of culture, education, and survival. 
Speaking with DancerGirl in the Sheila Barnett Studio, School of Dance at Edna Manley College, where she has shaped countless dancers and thinkers, including me, our conversation quickly revealed her philosophy: advocacy must come from embodiment. Ebanks described advocacy as inseparable from lived experience. “When your body has lived the rigors of dance, you speak with certainty because it comes from embodied knowledge,” she explained. This embodiment grounds her work, whether in classrooms, theaters, or community spaces. 
“You can’t go to the supermarket and plie two time and get groceries,” 
As our conversation turned to the future of Caribbean dance, Ebanks rejected the narrow idea of “creative industries,” arguing instead for a cultural ecosystem that nurtures financial, spiritual, and social growth. “Industry is a capitalist construct,” she explained. “Somebody has to bleed so somebody else can profit. Executives make the most, while the people doing the work barely survive. I prefer the word ecosystem.” For her, sustainability in dance requires more than an applause at curtain call; it demands policy support, fair compensation, and a shift in how society values artists. “You can’t go to the supermarket and plie two time and get groceries,” she said wryly. “This is real work, and it needs real-world money to make it happen.” Since the inception of theatre dance in Jamaica, the field has operated largely in a volunteer space—a model that, while useful in the early days of building, has remained stagnant for more than sixty years. To truly catapult into a for-profit sector, she insists, the ecosystem must expand its reach into the community in ways that generate both cultural value and financial sustainability for dancers.
Her reflections also extended beyond national borders. While international collaborations have brought new perspectives, Ebanks cautions against being written out of one’s own story. The Caribbean, she insists, must guard its heritage while still embracing innovation. “Traditional and contemporary don’t have to fight,” she noted. “Every popular form eventually becomes tradition. The dance is a mirror of our times.” A snapshot of the past reflected in our moving bodies, something to protect for the next generation, while also honoring cultural exchange. 
Even in moments of disruption, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, Ebanks saw possibility. Forced into online teaching for half the semester, she watched her students discover resilience in small spaces, adapting choreography to bedrooms, barrels, and the edges of dressers. At the same time, she returned to filmmaking as a mode of expression, creating short dance works that found life on social media and in online festivals. These shifts, she says, were reminders that adaptability is part of dance’s makeup.
“As a young artist, you’re creating culture as you breathe. You don’t need permission.”
Looking to the future, Ebanks urges the next generation of Caribbean dancers to move with both courage and community. “As a young artist, you’re creating culture as you breathe. You don’t need permission,” she advised. For her, dance is not just art — it is a reminder, a resistance, and a roadmap toward cultural transformation.

For the full interview, visit our website at dancergirlmag.com or our YouTube page DancerGirl. 





Dancer: Speak Up! 
Sherona McAllister: Faith, Ballet, and the Bloom of Possibility
For Jamaican dancer and choreographer Sherona McAllister, dance has always been more than performance, it is escape, expression, and spiritual offering. “I’m generally a quiet, reserved individual who lives in my head,” she admits. “But dance gives me a place where I can just explore, be creative, and even be someone else. I’m just grateful for the joy it gives me.”
That joy has carried her through every season of her life, from co-founding OBOG (One Body One God) alongside fellow artists Judine and Carissa, to her most recent project, Ballet Bloom, an adult ballet program designed to make ballet more accessible to Jamaicans.
Faith, she insists, was always the foundation. The genesis of OBOG began with McAllister’s vision of creating a space where dancers could marry technical excellence with spiritual devotion. “We just loved the Lord and wanted to use our gift of dance to serve Him,” she explains. The dream resonated instantly with her co-founders. “I shared the idea with Carissa, and she was literally reading my mind,” McAllister recalls. What began as a conversation soon blossomed into a movement, one that challenged traditional notions of dance in the church.
For decades, liturgical worship in the Caribbean followed strict conventions: hands lifted, bodies bowed, restrained gestures of devotion. Anything resembling contemporary or modern dance was often met with rebuke. But OBOG — and other emerging groups across the region, such as SEED in Trinidad — began to push boundaries, reclaiming the right of trained dancers to bring their full artistry into sacred spaces. “Why should professional dancers who love the Lord not be able to express themselves in church?” McAllister asks.

 “Ballet in Jamaica has traditionally been reserved for a certain demographic,” she says. “I wanted to break down that barrier. Ballet should be for everyone.”

Her latest venture, Ballet Bloom, builds on that same spirit of expansion. Designed for adults who never had the chance to study ballet as children, the program offers an entry point into a discipline long reserved for the young. Classes are deliberately priced to be affordable,  just $2,000 JMD per session. “Ballet in Jamaica has traditionally been reserved for a certain demographic,” she says. “I wanted to break down that barrier. Ballet should be for everyone.”
The name reflects both her love of flowers and her philosophy of growth. “It’s about patience,” she explains. “You nurture something, you wait, and then in time it blooms into something absolutely beautiful. And just like life, the bloom rests, then comes again. Ballet is like that too.”
That philosophy is evident in her studio. “In the early days there’s no fanciness, no glam,” she says. “It’s just practice, discipline, repetition much like tending to a flower. You water the soil, you nurture it, and one day it blooms. Even when you’ve bloomed, you still have to go back to the discipline. Always.”
To her surprise, some of her most dedicated students are women in their 50s and beyond. Their determination, she admits, reshaped her own outlook on aging. “I used to think after 50, you wrap up your career and focus on gardening alone. But these women give me hope. They remind me I have another 25, 30 years in me. They work hard, and it inspires me.”
McAllister, a medical doctor specializing in sports medicine, brings a rare dual perspective to her teaching. Her research into dancers’ bodies informs her approach to technique and injury prevention. She dreams of expanding Ballet Bloom into a program that integrates ballet with rehabilitation and fitness, especially for Caribbean bodies often overlooked in Eurocentric ballet standards. “We may not have the same flexibility, but we have different strengths, stronger muscles, different builds. Ballet can be adapted to us.”
Her classes reflect that principle of adaptation. Rather than rigidly adhering to age or prior experience, she tailors each exercise to the individual in front of her. A beginner might repeat foundational movements, while a more advanced dancer is challenged to increase speed, precision, or range. “What I see is what I work with. If you can do it, I’ll push you to the next level.”
But McAllister is more than a teacher; she is a mother of four, a homeschooling parent, and a woman of faith who sees ballet as both spiritual and physical practice. She admits the balancing act isn’t always perfect, but she finds joy in the rhythm of shifting roles. “When I’m with my kids, I’m there 100%. When I’m in class, I’m there 100%. That’s how I do it.”
For her, ballet embodies a profound paradox: strength and gentleness existing side by side. “We’re designed as complex and wonderful creatures,” she reflects. “In ballet, you can be powerful and gentle at the same time. That’s the beauty of it.”

“Leave your pride at the door. Be okay with looking silly, with feeling uncomfortable. Growth is never comfortable , there’s a reason it’s called growing pains. But if you try, you’ll surprise yourself.”
To women hesitating to step into a studio for the first time, her advice is simple: “Leave your pride at the door. Be okay with looking silly, with feeling uncomfortable. Growth is never comfortable , there’s a reason it’s called growing pains. But if you try, you’ll surprise yourself.”
For McAllister, ballet is not about perfection. It is about process, persistence, and the quiet triumph of showing up, a bloom that comes not overnight, but through the steady work of becoming.

For the full interview, visit our website at dancergirlmag.com or our YouTube page DancerGirl. 


